PyTorch dataset tutorial (#867)
google/grain: docs/tutorials/data_sources/pytorch_dataset_tutorial.md

---
jupytext:
  formats: ipynb,md:myst
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.17.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
---

> # PyTorch dataset tutorial

Reviewer: Is it possible to have a more descriptive title? Maybe something like "How to use a Torchvision dataset in the Grain pipeline"?

+++

> In this tutorial we're going to learn how to migrate from Torchvision to Grain pipeline for [Fashion-MNIST](https://github.com/zalandoresearch/fashion-mnist) dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we're going to learn how to migrate from the Torchvision to the Grain pipeline for the [Fashion-MNIST](https://github.com/zalandoresearch/fashion-mnist) dataset.
```

Author: Done!

+++

## Setup

Here we require `grain`, `torch`, and `torchvision` dependencies installed but the last will be used primarily for dataset access. Additionally we want `matplotlib` in our environment for displaying samples.

```{code-cell} ipython3

> # @test {"output": "ignore"}

Author: Indeed it's some legacy code - removed!

!pip install grain
# @test {"output": "ignore"}
!pip install numpy matplotlib torch torchvision
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
import grain
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
import torch
from PIL.Image import Image

# PyTorch imports
from torchvision import datasets
from torchvision.transforms import ToTensor, Lambda

rng = np.random.default_rng(0)
```

> ## Loading dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Loading the dataset with Torchvision
```

Author: Done!

> `FashionMNIST` function provides access to our dataset. There are 60k samples in the dataset, where each one of them is a Pillow image instance together with a label.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Torchvision `FashionMNIST` function provides access to our dataset. There are 60k samples in the dataset, where each one of them is a Pillow image instance together with a label.
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
fashion_mnist = datasets.FashionMNIST(root="data", train=True, download=True)
print(fashion_mnist)
print(fashion_mnist[0])
fashion_mnist[0][0]
```

> Here, for example, we have an ankle boot (label 9). First we should acknowledge that both sample and label requires a dedicated preprocessing:
> - Sample should be a PyTorch tensor
> - Label needs to use one-hot encoding, so `9` becomes `[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we have an ankle boot (label 9). First we should acknowledge that both sample and label require dedicated preprocessing:
- The sample should be a PyTorch tensor;
- The label needs to use one-hot encoding, so `9` becomes `[0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1]`.
```

Author: Done!

Let's inspect a few more samples first.

```{code-cell} ipython3
nrows, ncols = 4, 8
fig, axs = plt.subplots(nrows, ncols)
for x in range(ncols):
    for y in range(nrows):
        axs[y, x].imshow(fashion_mnist.data[rng.integers(len(fashion_mnist))])
        axs[y, x].set_axis_off()
```

> `torchvision`'s function, which imports the dataset, already offers `transform` and `target_transform` arguments. Let's confirm that `ToTensor` and `Lambda` do what we anticipate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`torchvision`'s `dataset` function, which imports the dataset, already offers `transform` and `target_transform` arguments. Let's confirm that `ToTensor` and `Lambda` do what we anticipate.
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
fashion_mnist_2 = datasets.FashionMNIST(
    root="data",
    train=True,
    download=True,
    transform=ToTensor(),
    target_transform=Lambda(
        lambda y: torch.zeros(10, dtype=torch.float).scatter_(0, torch.tensor(y), value=1)
    )
)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
(fashion_mnist_2[0][0].size(), fashion_mnist_2[0][1])
```

> The resulting contents are PyTorch tensor and one-hot encoded label indeed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting contents are a PyTorch tensor and a one-hot encoded label, as expected.
```

Author: Done!

> Now let's move to Grain! Given the unprocessed dataset we want to arrive with the same transformation. You might have noticed in the "Dataset basics" tutorial that defining a data source requires implementing a class that inherits from `grain.sources.RandomAccessDataSource`. With PyTorch datasets we don't need it - the dataset is already compliant with the protocol.

Reviewer: A suggestion but the main point is I think this should be a header; feel free to choose a section name that fits better.

```suggestion
## Processing the dataset with Grain

Now let's move to Grain! Given the unprocessed dataset we want to arrive with the same transformation. You might have noticed in the ["Dataset basics" tutorial](please add a link if possible) that defining a data source requires implementing a class that inherits from `grain.sources.RandomAccessDataSource`. With PyTorch datasets we don't need it - the dataset is already compliant with the protocol.
```

Reviewer: It's not very clear to me what the sentence below means:
```
Given the unprocessed dataset we want to arrive with the same transformation.
```
Maybe reword to be less vague?

First let's define our data source with random access capabilities.

```{code-cell} ipython3
fashion_source = fashion_mnist
```

> ## Preprocessing

Reviewer: If the previous suggestion is accepted, maybe this is not needed?

Author: That's correct - done!

Next let's move to the preprocessing stage. We implement a custom class which inherits from `grain.transforms.Map` and implements a `map` method. In this method we instantiate a PyTorch tensor and devise a one-hot encoded label.

> To make this rewrite more compelling let's use Grain capabilities beyond simple samples traversal. Assuming that we are interested in shoes only (labels: `5` - sandals, `7` - sneakers, and `9` - ankle boots) we implement a `Filter` class with `filter` that allows us to discard unwanted samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make this rewrite more compelling, let's use Grain's capabilities beyond simple samples traversal. Assuming that we are interested in shoes only (labels: `5` - sandals, `7` - sneakers, and `9` - ankle boots) we implement a `Filter` class with a `filter` that allows us to discard unwanted samples.
```

Author: Done!

```{code-cell} ipython3

> class Preprocess(grain.transforms.Map):

Reviewer 2: ToTensorAndOneHot ?

Author: Done!

    to_tensor = ToTensor()

    def map(self, element: tuple[Image, int]) -> tuple[torch.Tensor, torch.Tensor]:
        data = self.to_tensor(element[0])
        target = (
            torch.zeros(10, dtype=torch.float).scatter_(0, torch.tensor(element[1]), value=1)
        )
        return (data, target)

> class Filter(grain.transforms.Filter):

Reviewer 2: KeepShoesOnly?

Author: Done!
